[Music]
The overall objective of the project is to
measure the vital signs of the
rivers that make up part of the Cajón del Alimentos basin. That's why
we're taking measurements from five
different points in this basin to
make a comparison and
observe what these vital signs are.
We're actually referring to
variables that will determine the
water quality for the people who live along the
riverbank. We want them to get a closer look
and begin to understand how changeable
and vulnerable a river is.
Sometimes you don't know what's being
dumped into the river. So this is
like a point that can tell you,
from this point to this change in this
parameter, that there's a point that
needs to be polluted in some way. The
purpose is to have a
baseline to know, for
example, the amount
of chlorine, nitrates, inks,
temperature, salinity, and also to
observe if there is a presence or not of
pesticides and coliforms. In this way,
we can have a baseline
to compare what
the possible changes will be in the future. Now, changes
because there can be
natural variability, the scenario we are
seeing of climate change, but there is also
a  Tropical variability, which is
related to the potential impacts
of
mining variables,
can also affect the various
factors that determine
water quality. This is important because
this river feeds the
Maipo Canyon, sustaining life throughout the
valley, and also provides the drinking water that reaches
Santiago. We've been experiencing drought for two years now;
the amount of water in the Maipo has been
reduced significantly, by more than 30%. The
ability to clean these
contaminants, to remove the
internal minerals and sediments, is key, even though they are the most
concentrated. But there is also
very positive feedback from
the local people who participate, so
they
provide us with
vital information. This allows us, for example, to generate
a discussion based on our observations.
The data I
obtain will be numerical and
I will have to interpret it, and
thanks to local knowledge, it's much
easier to interpret it and arrive at a more
realistic conclusion, not just something I'm imagining.
That's the key to
citizen science: the
active participation of local people in taking samples.  but they
also participate in the dialogue of
interpretation
[Music]